My name is Valery Kapsar. I will read you a course on financial management. I am a professor at the Moscow Business School.
Today's topic is the financial documents of the enterprise.
We will consider two main questions.
The first one is to see what financial documents are the main ones at the enterprise.
We will consider the main document, the enterprise balance.
And the second question is to analyze the financial accounting, which is seen from the financial documents.
So, let's start with our first question.
Financial accounting is a collection of information about the funds of the enterprise, the sources of these funds and their movements.
The main question is why do we need financial accounting?
Why do all enterprises in our country and in any other country of the world prepare this accounting?
Who needs it and how much?
Let's think about this question together.
Who needs financial accounting? Who gets interesting results from it?
You are absolutely right.
First of all, the enterprise owner needs financial accounting.
The enterprise owner is the most interested person in the successful business.
He is very interested in whether he invested his money correctly, whether he is doing a business that brings him the most income.
Therefore, the enterprise owner studies and is ready to consider all the financial information that he receives every day.
The second most interested person is the manager who manages the enterprise.
Currently, more and more managers, the first members of the enterprise, are not the owners of the enterprise.
This is a common trend all over the world.
The owners gradually leave the management of the enterprise, transferring the management to high-level professionals.
A high-level professional is interested in the fact that the owner highly appreciates his work.
What is the assessment of his work? The success of the enterprise.
Therefore, for the manager, the results that the enterprise achieves are the most important point that characterizes his activity.
Therefore, the manager draws financial information, studies it, and makes management decisions to make the enterprise work even better.
Who else needs financial accounting?
You are absolutely right to notice that financial accounting is needed by the state structure.
I would like to draw your attention to the fact that the state in all countries of the world obliges the enterprise to provide financial accounting to the state bodies.
There are two state bodies that are particularly interested in financial accounting.
The first is the Tax Inspection.
The Tax Inspection is responsible for the collection of taxes, it monitors the enterprise's activities,
and therefore it is the most important responsibility to work with financial accounting, to receive it, to analyze it.
The second state body that is interested in financial accounting, not only financial, but in a broader sense,
is the State Bodies, which study the statistics of the enterprise, the industry, and the state as a whole.
Therefore, they also need the accounting that comes from the enterprise.
I dare to assure you that the accounting that the enterprise prepares, in terms of accounting for the accounting,
is the accounting that is primarily needed by the state bodies.
It is designed to be the accounting that is needed for these state bodies.
We will return to this question several times in our lectures, and mention it several times,
but today I am focusing on this most important point in our material.
The next people who need to know the financial accounting of the enterprise are investors and creditors.
Imagine that you are the company that invests in the enterprise.
You are very interested in how successfully those who invest their capital are doing business.
It is very important for you to know their financial accounting, to analyze it,
and to be sure that the invested funds will return to you in a hundred percent.
The same approach is pursued by bankers.
They issue loans to enterprises, and it is very important for them to get the loan back.
This is the result of the bankers' work, their professionalism,
and, in the end, it is their business to earn money by issuing loans.
Therefore, bankers are very careful about who they give loans to.
It is especially important, because you need to remember that loans are primarily used by those
who do not have enough money for one reason or another.
Therefore, there can be those who already have a very difficult financial situation.
They will not be able to save a single loan, but they will grab the straw and try to get it back
in order to pull their enterprise out of a difficult situation.
Bankers are very careful about giving loans only to those who are able to return it.
The next people who are interested in the financial situation are business partners.
Imagine that you run a business, your enterprise runs a business with a particular enterprise.
You jointly build a business, plan, make purchases, invest money.
Aren't you interested in how stable the enterprise you work with is?
If it burns, you will burn as well.
It is very important to know the financial situation of your business partner.
Therefore, before starting a large project, you must study the financial situation of your partner.
But even if you do not start a joint large project,
but you just buy, make purchases, or sell goods to this enterprise,
because you plan your business based on the fact that your partner will constantly make these purchases,
you need a stable financial situation for this.
Therefore, the interest in financial accountability is very appropriate.
And the last place, although not the last in importance,
is the interest in the financial accountability of the enterprise.
This is shown by the employees of this enterprise.
But not always.
There are cases in the life of an enterprise when it has a very difficult financial situation.
And when it can soon go bankrupt,
and then all the employees of this enterprise will be behind the gates.
In this case, employees are often fired without a salary.
At the same time, there are long-term delays in the salary.
Employees are very worried in these cases.
It is very important for them to know how stable this enterprise is,
whether it will survive, whether it will return.
After all, they are patriots, they continue to work at their enterprise.
They hope and believe in this enterprise.
They really want to know that everything is fine in this enterprise.
They are ready to ask every day, every week, if everything will be fine.
So we saw who needs financial accountability at the enterprise.
Thus, financial accountability is not an empty sound, not bare numbers on paper.
Financial accountability is a business and a life of a large number of people
that are connected by the business threads with this enterprise.
That is why we need to know financial accountability,
study it, understand it, read it, evaluate it and draw conclusions.
This is what our lecture is dedicated to.
Now let's talk about financial accountability.
What requirements are presented to it by all the above-mentioned people
who are interested in studying financial accountability?
Let's list them and discuss the most important ones.
Let's open their contents.
Financial accountability must be objective.
It must be truthful.
It should not contain lies, it should not contain embellishments.
Since everyone studies financial accountability and perceives it as a pure coin,
it should be absolutely truthful.
Unfortunately, it should be noted that business in our country
does not always provide objective financial accountability.
It is the case that business in our country is embellished
with financial accountability, especially for tax services.
Moreover, you can find such attitude of the business leaders
that financial accountability is made for tax services
and the leader is not even interested in financial accountability.
It is so far from reality.
This is a bad attitude to financial accountability.
This is the situation that should be avoided.
Time will put everything in its place.
Taxation in our country will become more or less normal,
civilized as in the rest of the world,
and our business will not run away from taxes,
will not hide from taxes, but will honestly pay the small taxes
that should be paid in any civilized country.
Then financial accountability that we are talking about
will become absolutely objective.
It will not contain a single drop of what is not really there.
The main requirement of financial accountability is its neutrality.
It should be neutral, regardless of the interests of a particular business.
It should be ready to accept any subjects
that are interested in financial accountability.
It should reflect the interests of all these subjects.
Financial accountability should be independent.
It should be as objective as possible,
regardless of the people who prepare it.
Recently, there has been a trend in our country
when accounting is transferred to outsourcing.
When there are specialized companies
that deal with accounting.
It is worth noting that if an independent company
that does not serve its own business,
does not serve its CEO,
does not conduct an accounting,
then this accounting is largely independent
of the will of the person to do so.
Therefore, it is more objective,
more precise in reflecting information.
The next requirement of accountability is its comparability.
The thing is that the accountability we are talking about
is not necessary on its own.
It is not necessary to put it on a shelf
and let it lie there and get dusty.
Accountability is necessary to conduct analysis
and compare various enterprises
or, within the framework of the same enterprise,
various periods of its business.
To compare various countries,
to consider the development of our own country
in which we live from a business point of view.
But in order to do all this,
all accountability must be similar, comparable.
In this case, they can easily be comparable.
Financial accountability must be periodic.
It cannot be issued every day.
It is not necessary,
because the preparation of this accountability
requires a lot of effort of the workers who prepare it.
But it cannot be issued
in a very long period of time,
let's say, every 10 years.
It is pointless to make management decisions every 10 years.
In 10 years, anything can happen to the enterprise.
It may not live to the next financial accountability.
But it is an optimal regime
in which the financial accountability is prepared.
Financial accountability is made once a quarter,
that is, four times a year.
As a result of the year,
annual financial accountability is made.
The next requirement is the full coverage.
Financial accountability must take into account
all the costs that the enterprise has incurred,
and all the results that it has achieved.
It must cover everything, reflect everything,
and show all the operations that took place at the enterprise.
It must not leave anything behind.
Financial accountability and shadow economy,
as we see, are incompatible.
Because one assumes the absence of the other.
Financial accountability must be reliable.
The information contained in it
must be true,
must be understandable,
it must cause trust.
Moreover, the information
that is considered in financial accountability
should not be infinitely large.
It should be narrowed down to the level
that is needed to understand
the real financial state of the enterprise.
This is what the next quality
that is presented in financial accountability is about.
It is its significance.
Only significant moments
should be in financial accountability.
What does annual financial accountability include?
Financial accountability prepares the accounting.
Annual financial accountability includes
the following.
Accounting balance, form 1.
Accounting of profits and losses, form 2.
Accounting of capital changes, form 3.
Accounting of money movements, form 4.
Accounting balance application, form 5.
An explanatory note
that analyzes the factors
that led to certain results of the enterprise.
This is the final part of the audit.
In the cases when this audit
is necessary for the enterprise.
Now we will look at
the main document of financial accountability
in more detail.
It is the accounting balance.
Before studying the accounting balance,
I recommend you to hold it in your hands.
One thing is to study it theoretically,
but you should see it in front of you.
On the slide that you see now
you see the general example
of the accounting balance.
It consists of two parts, the left and the right part.
We will talk about it in detail now.
But the most important thing is that
you should hold such an accounting balance in your hands.
Use your own enterprise.
It will be interesting for you to learn
how to use it.
The accounting balance is an open document.
No one hides it.
This document is presented to those who ask for it.
You can turn to your accounting office
and say that studying the course of financial management
and being ready to become a high-class financier
or the head of the enterprise
who understands the activities of the enterprise
and is going to manage it very high quality
requires studying the accounting balance.
No one will refuse you.
You will get the accounting balance
and study it carefully, read it,
you will understand and see a lot of useful information.
What does the accounting balance contain?
The left and the right part.
The left column.
The right column.
The left column shows the assets of the enterprise.
The assets of the enterprise are structured
according to the composition and direction of their use.
The right column shows the same assets,
but structured according to the sources of their financing.
The left and the right part,
I want to draw your attention to,
are the same assets of the enterprise.
The only difference is the cut of these assets.
One cut reflects the direction of use,
and the other cut means
the sources of the resources.
Where did these resources come from
and where were they directed?
It's all simple in the accounting balance.
There is nothing complicated.
The accounting balance also meets the following requirements.
Since these are the same resources,
the left and the right part,
the balance amount of the left part
is equal to the balance amount of the right part.
The balance amount of the right part
is equal to the balance amount of the left part.
Therefore, we can safely say
that the balance amount of all assets
is equal to the balance amount of all balances.
The balances of the enterprise
are the sources of the enterprise's financing.
They consist of two blocks.
The main source of the enterprise's capital
is the right balance amount of the left part.
Moreover, it consists of the private assets
as well as the obligations
that the enterprise has
in order to borrow some funds.
So, private assets and obligations
are equal to the assets.
Passives are equal to the assets,
and assets are equal to the amount
of private assets and obligations.
These are the requirements
of each part of the accounting balance.
Let's focus on the assets,
on the left part.
We will study them carefully
and see what they are.
I recommend you to take the balance
and study it carefully,
listen to the lecture and look at the balance.
It will be easier for you to master it,
to understand what it consists of,
and to understand the meaning of the lines.
Why are they written in one way or another?
There is nothing random or chaotic in the balance.
It contains the great logic
of the financiers
who prepared the balance.
The assets of the enterprise
are grouped by their liquidity.
Liquidity means
that the balance is not fixed
and that it is possible
to turn the assets into money.
The more liquidity the asset is,
the easier and faster
it turns into money.
It is clear that the most liquidity asset
is the money assets.
They are very easy to turn into money.
Everything else
requires a longer period
of time to turn
the assets into money.
The lines of the asset
are written from top to bottom
according to the degree of liquidity.
The top line
is the least liquidity asset,
the bottom line
is the fastest liquidity asset.
So, from top to bottom
the assets are divided
into two blocks.
The first one is the long-term assets.
They are located in the upper part of the balance.
You can see them.
And the bottom one is the short-term assets.
They live
less than the long-term assets.
In the balance,
they are called the non-return assets
and the return assets.
The long-term assets
are used for more than one reporting period.
As you remember,
the reporting period is one year.
And the assets used
for more than one year
are used in the production process
and transfer their value
slowly, through amortization
slowly, through amortization.
The short-term assets
have less than one reporting period.
The passives
are grouped by the return period.
Again, the movement from top to bottom
is divided into
the longer-term assets
and the short-term assets.
and the longer-term assets.
That's why the upper passives
are the assets,
the capital of the enterprise.
It is supposed to be returned
at the very last moment.
And if the enterprise works for a long time,
it will never be returned.
It will serve as long as the enterprise exists.
If we look at the
assets,
we will see
that the short-term assets,
those that serve less than one reporting period,
include the reserves,
the debit debt,
the short-term financial investments
and the money.
We have already said that the money is not random,
it is at the very bottom.
The short-term assets are the assets
that you invested for a very short period.
Maybe you have a loan.
And they will soon be returned
in the form of money.
That's why they are a little higher
than the money.
Next is the debit debt.
These assets are the assets
that you invested
and the money that you should
return, but you haven't yet.
We will talk about the debit
and credit debt later.
We will talk about it in more detail.
And now we will talk about the reserves.
The reserves are the highest
line of the short-term assets.
The reserves are what the enterprise needs
for normal functioning.
If the enterprise has no reserves,
it risks to disrupt
the rhythm of its work.
The enterprise should work
like a clock,
rhythmically, from minute to minute.
A production cycle is built on this.
But unfortunately,
there is a reality,
which is connected with the actions
of the enterprises.
They buy raw materials,
there is an electricity supply,
which can be unstable,
sometimes it can be disconnected.
There are employees of the enterprise,
who are also people,
who sometimes go on vacation.
Therefore, they are not at work.
Sometimes they get sick,
this is also a disruption of the production process,
a disruption of rhythm.
But a disruption of rhythm
is a painful phenomenon for the enterprise.
The fact is that the enterprise
is not on its own,
not on the Moon,
not detached from the reality.
This enterprise is connected
with a huge number of contracts
for the supply of the produced goods.
And the fact that the rhythm of the enterprise
is disrupted, and it cannot provide
the supply of this product in time,
leads to the failure of other enterprises.
But no one wants to deal
with an unrhythmic business,
with an unpredictable business,
which can break the contract.
This is not comfortable for the business.
If the business disrupts the rhythm of its work,
this enterprise is not very profitable
as a partner.
Not everyone wants to deal with it.
Especially not everyone wants to trust
their finances or invest their finances
in this enterprise.
Therefore, the enterprise,
unfortunately, has to have reserves.
And with the help of reserves,
certain additional expenses,
you need to build warehouses.
You need to have accessories in these warehouses.
And only then, when there are warehouses
with accessories, will there be
normal rhythmic work.
But these are additional expenses.
But, unfortunately, these additional expenses
must be paid by the enterprise.
Then they will provide the rhythm of work.
And not only in our country.
So far, we have not managed to achieve
such a degree of rhythm,
so that you can do without reserves.
So that you can carry out direct deliveries
of accessories for the enterprise,
and the enterprise would not need warehouses,
would not need reserves.
The only country that has realized
this possibility is Japan.
In Japan, the deliveries of accessories
are made directly from the wheels of the enterprise.
Where they are realized
in the production process.
There is no need to have reserves and warehouses.
The peculiarity of Japan...
Japan could not be repeated
by any other country.
Probably, this is related to the mentality
of Japanese business.
Japan is a very small country.
Very small.
Compare Russia and Japan.
Imagine on the map
a huge Russia and a small Japan.
And now, for comparison,
in these two countries
approximately the same population lives.
A huge Russia and a small Japan.
And this small size of the territory
has created a potential possibility
of fast delivery of accessories
from one enterprise to another.
Maybe, it is only necessary to move the road
and the delivery is already carried out.
This is one of the reasons
why in Japan it was possible
to implement the system
without warehouses on the enterprises.
Nevertheless, in our country
we have a lot of warehouses.
And often, without the need
of subjects,
the reserves are vital.
There are reserves, there is rhythm.
There is a great work,
there is a support of good relations
between enterprises.
The next point we will talk about
is about the positions
that exist at the enterprises.
There are two types of positions.
Debit and credit.
Debit positions are those
that are credited to the enterprise
but haven't been received yet.
Maybe, the enterprise
delivers goods
and gets a so-called goods credit.
This is especially common in trade.
The enterprise tries to get
goods without money,
with a payment deadline,
to return the money after the goods are delivered.
And the producers have more and more
debt.
They need more and more money.
But we have to understand
that no enterprise can give
its goods without getting money.
In any case, it will simply stop
functioning.
So, everything is only to a certain extent.
For this reason,
every enterprise in the country,
as well as in the whole world,
strives to not allow
high debt.
Yes, all enterprises agree
to send goods to the credit
but only with a return of money.
There is even a policy
to return the debt.
There are employees
whose function is
to return the debt.
They call in agents,
they talk to them every day,
they persuade them, beg them, ask them.
Then, in an orderly manner,
they ask them to return the money.
And in the worst case,
they call in the legal authorities.
They call in arbitration,
which can force the enterprise
to return the money,
or it can make it bankrupt
if it cannot return the money.
Calling in the legal authorities
is the most reliable,
although the last resort.
Besides the debenture debt,
the enterprise has a credit debt.
It is a tricky debt.
It is what you owe,
and you don't want to return it.
The most common reason is
that there is nothing to return.
Yes, there is a debt,
but there is nothing to return.
You can always return the money,
and you can pay it back,
but you cannot return it yet.
Often, it is before the production is completed.
When the production is completed,
you will have the money to pay the debt.
But sometimes
the enterprise misuses the credit debt,
even when it has the money.
And when it develops very quickly,
it tries not to return it.
In this case, it works negatively.
The thing is,
the return of the credit debt
is like a credit card debt.
It is a matter of honor.
If the enterprise returns it,
it is trusted,
and it can continue to receive
the credit debt.
But if the enterprise has a normal financial situation,
that it has money,
it buys products,
but does not want to return the credit debt,
the enterprise loses trust.
It does not want to work with it,
because it misuses
the trust of its partners.
Therefore, the credit debt
is a double-edged sword.
Almost all enterprises have a credit debt.
But it cannot be misused.
And if you have the opportunity,
when you have a financial improvement
of the enterprise's activities,
the credit debt should be returned
at least partially,
at least to your most important business partners.
Then the trust in you will be much higher.
Now we will talk about money.
We said that the lowest line of the asset
is the money.
Why does an enterprise need money?
Where to go?
First, you have to pay the salary.
Second, you have to buy the components,
carry out the production process,
and sell the products.
You can never do without money.
That's on the one hand.
But imagine that an enterprise
does not have money.
It's a difficult case.
An enterprise has nothing to pay
to its employees.
But in our country,
the lion's share of the population
lives from salary to salary.
As soon as the salary delay begins,
it affects the workers' condition.
The company starts looking for new jobs.
It has an opportunity to lose
reliable, proven, necessary personnel.
Moreover, if a person does not receive
his salary for a long time,
all his thoughts are not about work,
but about how to survive in this situation.
Even in this case,
the enterprise starts losing its employees.
If it does not have money,
it will not be able to pay for its work.
Who will do the work for you
for the second time?
We see that an enterprise needs money
to function normally.
If an enterprise wants to develop,
to produce more and more products,
it needs money to hire new employees,
to sign new contracts,
to buy new products,
to buy new equipment.
All this is impossible without money.
Yes, it is clear.
You say that money is necessary.
Why then do many enterprises not have it?
Why does this debt appear
that makes enterprises
function for someone else's money?
The fact is that there is
such a phenomenon as inflation.
Inflation devalues the money
that is in the enterprise's account.
Every day,
inflation devalues a certain part
of the money.
And the higher the inflation level,
the more money is devalued.
This year,
according to the forecast,
8% inflation is expected in the country.
The company's money will disappear.
It will simply disappear
due to inflation.
But if the money is kept in another form,
for example, in the form of stocks,
then in a year,
when inflation occurs,
the prices of these stocks will rise.
And we will see
that instead of devaluing money,
the prices of stocks
will not only decrease,
but will remain.
Because we kept money
in the form of stocks.
And this inflation
pushes enterprises to get rid of money,
to stop keeping it,
to let it go as quickly as possible.
Today, we got money,
but we can't get it back.
Let it be stocks,
let it be components.
Yes, this is a struggle against inflation.
And those who use this money
save their money and don't lose it.
But unfortunately,
if there is no money in the company,
then other problems arise.
And the whole work of the company
is to fix these two extremes.
On the one hand,
save money from inflation,
and on the other hand,
have the necessary money
to let the company work rhythmically,
and pay the salary and develop.
To find this line
and the task of the financiers,
including you, listeners,
and management,
is to teach how to distribute
the company's finances
to provide the company with optimal work.
If we look at the assets,
we will see that in the upper part
there are non-return assets.
If the non-return assets
participate once during the accounting period,
then the non-return assets
will be returned to the company
during the accounting period,
during the year.
Look at the slide,
non-material assets,
basic funds,
unfinished construction,
long-term financial investments,
and other non-return assets.
These are assets that serve the company
for many years.
This is a workshop that will serve
this company for many years.
This is equipment that will serve
for many years.
These are non-material assets,
that is, assets that can bring
income to the company.
For example, licenses, patents,
trademarks,
and other assets that the company
will build its business on.
Long-term financial investments
are investments in other companies
in the form of loans.
Sometimes the companies lend money to each other.
When it is lent from banks,
it is a loan.
When it is lent from another company,
Sometimes loans are given for joint business.
In any case, these are funds
invested to run a business.
Now let's look at the passive,
the right part of the balance.
The right part of the balance
is passive.
These are the sources of the company's resources.
Passive is responsible for
the balance of the company's assets.
Now let's look at where the money came from.
Where did the company get these resources?
How did it get them?
Looking at the right part of the balance,
we see where the company got these resources.
First of all, without counting the top,
we see that there is its own capital.
That is, what is the company's property.
The top is the institutional capital
that the company has invested
and could gradually increase
the institutional capital as it existed.
The institutional capital is needed
for the company to start functioning.
Over time, the institutional capital increases.
And the greater the institutional capital,
the more important this company is in the market.
You probably know that the minimum
amount of institutional capital
in our country is 10,000 rubles.
Tell me, please,
can at least one enterprise function normally
if it has only 10,000 rubles?
No. You can only register the enterprise
with this money. That's all.
Moreover, all this amount
will be taken by banks
for opening accounts for you and working with you.
And by the time you start functioning
as an enterprise, you will have no money in your account.
The institutional capital is very, very little.
And when the enterprise says,
what is the size of your institutional capital?
10,000 rubles?
Well, then you are such a small, small enterprise.
And the attitude to you is the same.
And when they say that you have many, many millions,
or even billions of institutional capital,
you are very, very reliable.
It is not by chance that the requirement
for 5 million euros is already a solid requirement.
Although it is minimal.
But this already means that you can trust this bank.
And if there was only 10,000 rubles,
then there would be no trust for such a bank.
In addition to the capital itself,
which we are talking about now,
the enterprise's passive is a long-term
and short-term commitment.
The enterprise functions
not only at the expense of its own funds,
but often not only at the expense of its own funds,
but also at the expense of the loans
that it receives on the market.
What are the main forms of loans?
First of all, it is a loan.
An enterprise that can provide
a mortgage, which functions normally,
which is financially stable,
for such an enterprise is not a big loan.
It is very difficult to get a loan in a bank.
Today, the banking sector is quite developed,
and you can apply to a huge number of banks
for a loan.
The main condition for obtaining a loan
is financial stability
and the presence of a mortgage
at the enterprise itself.
Unfortunately, the enterprise is trying
to apply for a loan when they already have
a mortgage, but the conditions are not met.
But even then, banks can't help.
The business should treat loans like this.
A loan is not a life-saving circle,
but a way of business development.
If you approach it like this,
then a loan is needed for a successfully
developing enterprise
to develop even faster.
Banks are happy to go to all kinds of loans.
They are happy to meet you.
The enterprise itself easily processes
the loan, makes a profit,
and shares it with the banks
that gave them the loan.
Besides loans, there are loans.
As I told you today,
loans are the same loan,
but they are not obtained from a bank,
but from another enterprise,
and they are not in business partnership.
It lends you money,
and you lend it to it.
It's almost the same loan,
but the difference is that
it doesn't require a mortgage.
A loan is built between businesses
on trust.
If we trust each other as business partners,
we lend each other money
and we run a business together.
This is the difference between loans and loans.
This difference is also seen
in Muslim banks.
It's not without interest for you to know
that Muslim banks are different from banks
that have developed in the Christian world.
Muslim banks are connected
by the fact that they should function
in a way that doesn't violate the conditions
of the Christian world.
The Koran forbids taking interest
in the money provided.
The entire banking world is built
on the fact that a bank earns interest
on the loan it gives.
This contradiction
didn't allow the Muslim banks
to appear for a long time.
Only the search of businessmen
to not violate the Koran
but to function as a bank
led to the fact that
Muslim banks don't issue loans
but when they do,
they join the company in business.
They don't get a percentage,
but the profit earned in the project.
If the profit isn't earned,
they don't get it back.
If they lose, they lose together.
The risk is doubled.
This is the difference
between Muslim banks and the banks
we are used to dealing with in our country.
In our country, there are no Muslim banks.
But if you, as a financier,
work in Muslim countries,
like the UAE,
remember that the banks there
are the ones who pay the interest.
Besides loans and loans,
the companies attract money
by placing bonds and interest.
Sometimes you need to pay,
but you don't have the money.
We've already said that
the companies are fighting inflation,
they tighten their belts,
but you need to pay to keep working.
What can you do?
There's Vexel.
You can pay with Vexel.
It's a loan agreement
that the company writes out
and gives its partner the right
to ask for the money
after a certain period.
Vexel can live its own life
and move from one company
to another.
The trust in Vexel
is determined by the trust
in the person who gave it.
If Vexel gave out a reliable company,
it lives a full financial life.
Everyone trusts it
and it's no different from money.
Vexel also brings interest.
But if you've already borrowed
all the loans you could,
all the banks have given you,
but the bonds are over,
no one will give you loans anymore.
You've already borrowed everything you could.
You've already given out all the loans
to anyone who agreed to take Vexel.
You want to develop further.
You need money.
That's when the company
applies for a bond.
It's a valuable document
that the company
puts on the market.
Everyone who wants to buy
a bond pays a higher interest
than a company that puts
deposits in banks.
Banks are usually more reliable
than bonds.
But here's an important point.
Whose bonds will you buy?
If you buy bonds of a large,
reliable company,
be sure that the bonds
are 100% reliable.
You'll get your interest
and it'll be more, better,
than just keeping it
on an account
where inflation is working.
All these instruments I've listed
are long-term bonds.
They last for more than one year.
But these instruments can be used
for less than one year.
You can get a loan for less than one year.
For example, overdraft.
The point is
that every month
you have to report to the bank
that you can pay off the loan.
You have to get the same amount
as the bank.
If the capital turnover
is high,
for example,
overdraft is the best loan.
This loan is suitable
for trading companies.
It doesn't require a deposit.
The most restricting factor
in getting a loan
is a deposit.
Especially in our Russian business
where our companies grow from scratch.
Overdraft doesn't require a deposit.
For businesses
where the capital turnover
is less than one month,
overdraft is the best loan.
Think about it.
If you have your own business,
what is the capital turnover
for your business?
If it's less than one month,
go to the bank and say
that you have a loan
that you can pay off
for less than one year.
In this case,
all these sources
are short-term obligations.
They are the source
of the business' functioning.
We have examined
the balance of the business.
We have seen the sources
and the goals of the business.
We have seen the balance of assets.
The balance is the main
financial document of the business.
The best financiers
and accountants work on the balance.